here's a fun one what's the size of
Portugal and might just end up
destroying the world it's not an
asteroid headed this way at least I hope
it's not no it's the quantity of energy
required annually to power the world's
most popular cryptocurrency Bitcoin in
fact it now takes more energy to mine
one dollar of Bitcoin than one dollar of
gold copper or platinum buried deep in
the earth so what if the song lied to us
and money doesn't make the world go
round what if money actually makes the
world and our survival on it
unsustainable in the extreme firstly
let's define what crypto currencies
actually are how do they work what do
they smell like and can I use them to
buy one of those delightful glitter
pudding unicorns that are so popular
right now the word cryptocurrency can be
easily divided into two parts crypto
comes from the Greek word crypto which
means concealed or secret and currency
comes from the English word currency
which means money or currency currency
has a long and storied history first
ever sparta then coins then paper then
plastic and now people desperately
wiggling their phones over contactless
payment readers in busy pubs but whether
metal paper plastic or digital these
kinds of currency are controlled by
banks regulated by governments otherwise
known as the man these institutions
controlled how much the currency was
worth usually took a cut of any money
they dealt with and also had to be
trusted to look after our cash and data
securely which recent banking crashes
and scandals have shown to be quite
tricky it's at this point in 2009 that a
figure called Satoshi Nakamoto pops up
or rather doesn't pop up as this is
probably a made-up name and might will
not be an individual at all regardless
this is the name at the top of the white
paper that defined and created the first
legitimate cryptocurrency to be traded
Bitcoin what mister or missus or messes
or Reverend Nakamoto proposed was that
rather than financial institutions
keeping control of us on judex we should
be able to exchange money with each
other directly in exactly the same way
that naughty people on the internet used
to share the latest episode of South
Park before it was on the telly a
peer-to-peer electronic cash system with
no one in charge and no one
taking a cut so Bitcoin had a technical
template but it needed two things to
flourish two things that old money
gained from banks confidence and
security I mean you can't just make up a
brand new money system and then start
chucking it all over the place like a
wrapper in a car showroom otherwise we'd
all do it all the time that's where the
crypto element of cryptocurrency enters
the picture bitcoins and other
cryptocurrencies use a complicated
system of codes and ciphers to ensure
that the currency itself and the
transactions they are involved with are
secure firstly when you join a
particular cryptocurrency Network you
are issued with a key which is a coded
chunk of data that individually
identifies you so no one else can steal
your identity then when you're about to
make a transaction you inform the rest
of your cryptocurrency network by using
your key if you ever find yourself in a
party cornered by someone who's heavily
involved in crypto currencies you can
expect to hear a lot about blockchain
while regular human citizens take their
money and deposit it in a bank and that
bank is made up of caches and paper and
pens and those squiggly little toys for
kids crypto currencies don't bother with
any of that they have no centralized
authority instead they use this
blockchain let me try and describe
blockchain imagine you have a large
fabulous art collection and amongst your
acquisitions is this a genuine original
prank see the new priced off the side of
a local community center and is worth
several million quid you've had interest
in purchasing this artwork from noted
art collector Sir Elton of John but
what's stopping you a deeply flawed
individual from promising this same
piece of artwork to some other art
collectors at the same time like Kim
Kardashian or Bradley Walsh or for that
matter knocking up a load of fake pranks
ease in flogging those off as well how
can somebody be sure that they're about
to buy a real work of art the obvious
answer would be to call in a group of
the world's leading pranksy experts to
scrutinize the work they make sure it's
a legit artwork and that there's only
one sale going on you get several
million quid and Elton gets a mural
better luck next time Kim Kardashian and
Bradley Walsh
and the blockchain governing a
cryptocurrency works in a broadly
similar way each blockchain is a virtual
and crucially public record of every
transaction made with that particular
cryptocurrency so when you go to make a
transaction known as a block other users
are able to verify the details before
you complete the sale adding a block to
the chain block chain individuals who
oversee these transactions are called
miners these are the art experts
checking the authenticity of your
pranksy except there are millions of
them checking millions of artworks or
transactions every day and if a miner
work to lie for example claiming of
worthless scribble bime what was
actually a priceless prank see the other
miners would spot the fraud and correct
it in return for volunteering their
services miners are rewarded with a
portion of the crypto currency involved
so what is stopping me you or Elton
overseeing the same transactions and
getting paid for it
well this is where things get even more
deliciously complicated and is the bit
that could potentially murder the world
mining is a first-come-first-served
process or more accurately first come
first solved as each transaction is
accompanied by a very complex
mathematical equation the first miner or
rather - supercomputer farm who solves
this equation gets to validate the
transaction and takes the reward this is
called proof of work on average it
usually takes a - farm about 10 minutes
to solve this equation and verify a
Bitcoin transaction yes I did say
supercomputer farm before you cross out
your current occupation in your passport
and scroll cryptocurrency miner over the
top in biro do bear in mind that the
amount of hardware calling systems and
electricity required to deal with those
sorts of equations means it's really
really hard to actually make any money
as a miner to compound this as more
people start trying to verify
transactions the blood creation rate
increases lowering the value of a block
to compensate the algorithm makes the
proof of work equations harder to solve
the result is an old-fashioned tech arms
race and it stands to reason that very
clever globally distributed equation
solving transaction verifying
supercomputers use an enormous amount of
energy estimates suggest that the single
Bitcoin transaction uses more energy
than a quarter of a million visa card
transactions this is roughly the same
amount of power as the average American
home needs for nearly two weeks
and you just know they've left the
lights on all day and that's just one
transaction as of right now almost
lunchtime on Friday the 22nd of February
there are on average about 300,000
Bitcoin transactions per day leading
economists and ecologists to equate
bitcoins energy consumption with that of
a medium-sized first world country like
Singapore or Portugal
sadly the problem is getting worse as
more transactions occur as more crypto
currencies are introduced and as mining
equations grow more conflicts even more
energy is needed
China has emerged as a big Bitcoin miner
with coal burning power fueling most of
their work our wonderful new financial
utopia is prodding mother nature
heartily with a big suit covered stick
and damage to the Earth's fragile
climate could be considerable so are
there any ways to make crypto currencies
greener well some new currencies are
using a method known as proof of stake
in proof of state currencies mine has
become validators a validator has to
stake an amount of their own money
against approving the transaction with
those placing larger stakes being more
likely to be chosen to validate now
rather than everyone maxing out their
CPUs in a race to solve an equation one
person is chosen to solve it honestly
with their stake as surety if you were
to validate a fraudulent transaction you
lose your stake and your reputation
meanwhile countries like Iceland and
Austria are harnessing their extensive
geothermal and hydroelectric resources
in the name of crypto and some companies
are focusing on renewable energy to
power their crypto currencies so is
there a danger of these crypto
currencies taking the place of good old
clunky pounds and pence and polluting
the planet as a consequence well it
seems unlikely right now there's still a
limited amount of things you can
actually get with crypto and most people
get a hold of their bitcoins by using
traditional currency in the first place
which sort of makes the whole thing
pointless but who knows a decade ago the
thought of using your phone to pay for a
cup of tea seemed to be the arena of
pure fantasy and now we do it all the
time without thinking or caring which
means that unless our boffin overlords
don't device safer greener ways of
powering cryptocurrency tech Earth's
climate might be facing even more of a
kicking kicking it could probably do
without at the moment just one more
thing for you to worry about and lose
sleep over just don't leave the lights
on good night
[Music]
you